# Arqueología, Patrimonio y Arquitectura: protohistoria

## Academic cursus

Most of my academic cursus was focused on the archaeology of Northwestern Mediterranean societies late Prehistory (Neolithic and Protohistory). More precisely my speciality is the study of ancient iconographic systems (rock-art, pottery and stelae decorations) belonging to these societies. After a division of Prehistory into tools-related industry periods, with Palaeolithic, Neolithic (stone *instrumentum*), and Copper Age, Bronze Age and Iron Age (metalic *instrumentum*), starts the Protohistory commonly accepted as the emergence of proto-state societies without (or a scarce use) of writing systems. Writing is the most rigurous semiographic, before its use symbolic concerns of societies where mostlty accessible through paintings, engravings, steale and ceramic decorations. All these iconographic manifestations belong to the symbolic subsystem [^2]. But, at the difference of other sub-systems -- like, for example, subsistence, technological or demographic -- the study of pre- and protohistorical representation is characterised by a great variability through time and space (space-dependend and time-dependend). Indeed, iconography is relatively disconnected to any determinism imposed by matter (*déterminisme imposé par la matière* [^3]) allowing a great freedom of expression in the themes, styles, technics or selected mediums. Even more, it is very much uncertain whether this iconographic content is meaningful *per se*, idenpendently from its location, or whether it is just signs the importance of the a particular place. For these reasons, study of the ancient iconography has been set apart from other subsystems, archaeologists considering that it is still lacking of common standards, shared methods and consensus on how any interpretations can be drawn from the observed data.
  
To deal with its great variability my approach was to developped multi-scalar and multi-paradigm statistics to unveal the statistical regularities of large iconographic datasets. The developpment of this type of analysis would have been fruitless without efficient tools and a robust and iterative method. That is why I developped computer programming alongside with database management, statistical scripted routines, with a particular focus on geometrical (topological relationships, shape analysis) and geographical analysis (through spatial functions) to deal with the graphical units, their support, and the archaeological sites where they belong. My first major research was on one of the largest concentration of rock art in Europe, with almost 20,000 figurative engravings, the Mount bego site [^4]. At this time I applied descriptive, exploratory and confirmatory analysis perfomed on a geodatabase I created. This work was mostlty useful to percieve the *longue durée* of the site occupatio and to disentangle the different iconographic layers. It led me to significantly improve my skills in GIS, databases and statistical analysis. I joined the research laboratory ASM-CNRS (University of Montpellier) on a postdoctoral project (Labex Archimede) to deal with a well-known case of French Protohistory: the brief reintroduction of figurative art during the end of the Late Bronze Age. This postdoc led me to setup the root of an innovative method to record and analyse iconographic content though a geometric graph (network analysis). With colleagues we published this method, as an open-source library, for the R scripting language[^5]. I drawn a synthesis of the protohistoric iconography in France[^1], I also worked on medieval rock-art site in the Spanish Central Pyrenean[^9], on Iron Age rock-art the Italian Central Alps[^6] and on Early Neolithic figurative bladelets in the Near East[^8]

After my PhD, I leveled up my skills on GIS, databases and statitics joining a department of Cartography (University of Bourgogne) where I learned that these technics could be put together with computer programming and conducted entirely on open-source software. As mentionned, iconography is my speciality, but most of the time I have worked outside this field of research since my computer skills allows me to work on very different time periods, geographical areas or thematic. 
Among other things, I have worked on the spread of Neolithic, developping research and data papers alongside online interactive applications [^7]. I have take in charge the statistics of a a very comprehensive study of livestock management (from Late Neolithic to Late Antiquity) in Northeastern Spain[^10], I am currently involved in the French ANR Itineris project on Italic metalwork techniques during the Early Iron Age, and I have worked on spatial distribution of latin epigraphy in Southern France[^11]. I joined the University of Oxford, as a researcher and database manager, on the Endangered Archaeology in Middle East and North Africa (EAMENA) in october 2021. The EAMENA database gathers more than 300,000 records of heritage places, information resources, etc. As I will explain it is compliant with the highest standards of the open science and FAIR data.

Until now, I found this variety of research very rewarding. Today, I would like to consolidate over the long term a selection of these numerous projects.  

## Research project

As my cursus, my project entangled two principal components:  
* A: Development of the Interoperability Framework for Ancient Iconography (IFAI)  
* B: Archaeology of Pre- and Protohistical societies semiographies

### A. Development of the IFAI

As mentioned, sudy of ancient iconography is lacking of common standards and shared practices. It is the main reason to set up an Interoperability Framework for Ancient Iconography (IFAI, working title) in the frame of the open science horizon. At the opposite, following the spread of the web and use of digital camera, both management of cultural heritage, arts and architecture and image recognition softwares have made significant improvements to develop thesauri (Getty AAT, Getty IA[^12], Iconoclass[^20]), metadata standards (EXIF, XMP[^14]), high resolution images sharing on the web with shared API, shared content (IIIF[^13]), automated object/pattern/image recognition (eg. Google Image), etc. These improvements not only concern the 2D images but also the 3D objects with the development of the new standard HTML5 and the base of the so-called web3D[^15]. Indeed, most of the IT existing for 2D objects are promised to be available for 3D objects in a next future. Archaeological researches on ancient iconography often led to database but these database are rarely interoperable with other ones. Their use is then limited to a certain area or a certain time period. Nowadays, European-funded projects are asked to promote open science (OS), to make data "as accessible as possible and as closed as necessary". But, archaeologists are often unarmed to deal with concepts like FAIR data[^16], linked open data (LOD[^19]), data management plan (DMP[^17]), DOI/UUID[^18]. If they understand them it remains quite unclear how to implement them. On the other hand, computer scientists do not understand entirely practices in social sciences, or are not able to highlight the relevant problematics in a research field. My computer skills and experience as an archaeologist will allow me to set up -- or contribute significantly to set up -- this IFAI. To do so, I will be in touch with the main authorative institutions who provide controled vocabularies, good practices, iso-standards (eg. Getty Institute, ARIADNEplus infrastructure) and I will seek for specialist contributions to open their database following the OS word: "publish once and reuse often". 

Today, I master R and Python programming languages. I am also able to hook any JavaScript scripts or file formats (JSON, GeoJSON). R is the most common used language in archaeology; its use is mostly for the front-end (user interface), Python is the most world widespread language; its use is mostly for back-end (databases, servers, file/image manipulation). Finally JavaScript is the language of the interactive web. Along these programming languages, I master several database systems, in the first place of which Postgres/Postgis. Postgres is the core of the EAMENA database I manage. EAMENA itself is based on the open source Arches database developped by the Getty Conservation Institute for the management of inamovible cultural heritage. Arches is a geo-web NoSQL database (ie, semantic graph-based database). Actually, Arches is more a platform than a database since it offers a full-stack information system integrate the iso-standard CIDOC-CRM, the Dublin Core vocabulary, the SKOS RDF data model, a SPARL endpoint, host a IIIF plugin, etc. Today Arches is used in several international projects hosted by the universities of Oxford, Cambridge, the Max Planck Institute, etc.

To developp this IFAI, my first step will be to setup a GitHub repository. GitHub is a leading web-platform for developing computer applications and to share source code offering all the facilities to complies with the FAIR principles (licences, 'how to cite', versioning, contribution rules, Zenodo releases, triggered workflows, etc.). Nowadays, GitHub is the platform of any open-source collaborative IT project.

### B: Archaeology of Pre- and Protohistical societies semiographies

While the IFAI will be the information (litterarly "to shape, give form to, delineate"), the knowlegde about semiographic systems will come from a wide survey of iconography of Western Asia (from Middle East to the Atlantic) in the pre-writing later times. Graphical contents are the sum of individual graphical units. The artifact "graphical unit" has different dimensions: (i) its theme (eg., a horse, a human figure) which can be described in a hierachical thesaurus[^21], (ii) its shape which is properly its geometry and can be manage with shape analysis, (iii) its topology (its relative location compared with other graphical units) which can be manage with the *iconr* package (see [^5]), (iv) its technics (eg., paintings, painting with iron oxyds, engravings) which can also be manage with hierachical thesaurus and multifactorial analysis (for example, for the results of elemental analysis made with pXRF on paintings), (v) its support (eg., stelae, a situla), (vi) its geographical location, and (vii) its chronology. The caracterization of a "graphical content" is then, the matrix computation of these seven dimension to measure the distances beetwen multiple pairwise of decorated objects. Of course not all these dimensions can be assess, and archaeological remains have numerous missing data, furthermore a lot of the graphical production of ancient periods have disappeared with their support (eg., carved wood, printed textile, skin tatoos). This is the main limitation of any archaeological study.
one My own archives counts drawings, photographs, bibliographic references, descrition and geodatabase records of near 3,000 objects with iconographic contents (rock panels, stelae, potteries, metallic vessels, etc.). These objects belong to a period sprawling from the Early Neolithic to the first Iron Age in Spain, France, Italy and are part of well-known series, among which: Levantine rock paintings, Macro-schematic rock paintings, Schematic rock-art, Atlantic megalithism rock-art, Atlantic cups-and-rings, Galician rock-art, Rouergue stelae, Extremadura stelae, Lunigiana stelae, Situla Art. Alongside with these decorated objets my database records 7,700 graphical units and near 430 complete graphs, that is to say the mapping of 430 semiographies (see [^5]). I will subset this data and completed these subsets in compliance with the FAIR policies and semantic web (files' DOI, EXIF and XMP metadata of drawings and photographs, JSON manifests for IIIF, etc.). In parallel, I will setup a scripted routines to cast each of datasets into an open and interoparble formats (open data) and exposed them on a server open to specialists (with different king of user permissions) for them to provide their expertise (quality control), complete the missing data, and collaborate to draw conclusions on the archaeological meaning of these iconographic contents. In terms of collaboration, I plan to first seek for European/international projects to assess the selected IT and standards. As mentioned, I already worked on series and have collaborations in Spain, France and Italy. Datasets coming from these countries will be the first ones I will explore. Staring with the so-called Warrior Stelae (es: *Estelas de Guerreros*) belonging to the Late Bronze Age of Extremadure (southwestern Spain) for which I already have almost all the graphs (n = 122), as well as complete graphs of connected corpus: Alentejo stelae (South Portugal, n = 31), Headdress Diadem stelae (Western Spain, n = 34), among others.
As mentioned (A), all studied and published datasets will be made compliant with the FAIR policies. An IIIF viewer will be setup to give access to a large audience to the iconographic content. In such a way, the heritage value of the past iconography will be shared through the international community[^22] and preserved for future generations.

## Last words

The IT settings I will developp not only will benefit to the study of ancient iconographic systems, but to the whole CSIC team. As my CV shows it, I am keen to different collaborations.

[^1]: Thomas Huet (2018). Une revue de l'iconographie du début du Néolithique à la fin de l’âge du Bronze (ca. 5700-750 avant notre ère) en France. In La Protohistoire de la France (pp. 221–249). Hermann.
[^2]: Renfrew, C., & Bahn, P. (1991). Archaeology: theories, methods and practice. (Vol. 2) Thames and Hudson London.
[^3]: Leroi-Gourhan, A. (1941). L'homme et la matiere: evolution et techniques (vol. 1). Albin Michel; Leroi-Gourhan, A. (1945). Milieu et techniques: evolution et techniques (vol. 2). Albin Michel.
[^4]: Thomas Huet (2017). Les gravures piquetées du Mont Bego (Alpes-Maritimes) : organisation spatiale et sériation (6e-2e millénaire avant J.-C.). (Vol. 63) Mémoires de la Société Préhistorique Française.; Huet, T., & Bianchi, N. (2016). A study of the Roche de l'Autel's pecked engravings, Les Merveilles sector, Mont Bego area (Alpes-Maritimes, France). Journal of Archaeological Science: Reports, 5, 105–118.; Huet, T. (2017). New Perspectives on the Chronology and Meaning of Mont Bego Rock Art (Alpes-Maritimes, France). Cambridge Archaeological Journal, 27(2), 199–221. 
[^5]: Huet, T., Pozo, J., & Alexander, C. (2021). Analysis of Prehistoric Iconography with the R package iconr. Journal of Open Source Software, 6(61), 3191.
[^6]: Alexander, C., Maretta, A., Huet, T., & Chippindale, C. (2021). Rules of ordering and grouping in the pitoti, the later prehistoric rock-engravings of Valcamonica (BS), Italy: from solitary figures through clusters, graphic groups, and scenes to narrative. In Making Scenes. Global Perspectives on Scenes in Rock Art (pp. 259-276). Berghahn.
[^7]: Huet, T., Cubas, M., Gibaja, J., Oms, F., & Mazzucco, N. (2022). NeoNet Dataset. Radiocarbon Dates for the Late Mesolithic/Early Neolithic Transition in the North Central-Western Mediterranean Basin. Journal of Open Archaeology Data, 10(3), 1-8.; http://shinyserver.cfs.unipi.it:3838/C14/; Binder, D., Gomart, L., Huet, T., Kacar S., Maggi, R., Manen, C., Radi, G., Tozzi, N., & C. Panelli (2022). Le complexe de la Céramique imprimée de Méditerranée centrale et occidentale : une synthese chrono-culturelle (7e et 6e millénaires BCE). In Céramiques imprimées de Méditerranée occidentale (6e millénaire BCE) : Données, approches et enjeux nouveaux. Actes des journées de la Société préhistorique française, Nice, 18-20 mars 2019. Société préhistorique française.
[^8]: Ibañez, J., Muniz, J., Huet, T., Santana, J., Teira, L., Borrell, F., Rosillo, R., & Iriarte, E. (2020). Flint 'figurines' from the Early Neolithic site of Kharaysin, Jordan. Antiquity, 94(376), 880–899.
[^9]: Gassiot Ballbé, E., Augé Martínez, O., Huet, T., Lapedra, S., & Sánchez Bonastre, G. (2020). Prospecció i documentació dels gravats rupestres medievals de Saurí (Sort, Pallars Sobirà). Memòria d’intervenció arqueològica [White paper]. UAB-CSIC.
[^10]: Nieto Espinet, A., Huet, T., Trentacoste, A., Guimarães, S., Orengo, H., & Valenzuela-Lamas, S. (2021). Resilience and livestock adaptations to demographic growth and technological change: A diachronic perspective from the Late Bronze Age to Late Antiquity in NE Iberia. PLOS ONE.
[^11]: Nuninger, L., Christol, M., Pasqualini, A., Garmy, P., Favory, F., Bertoncello, F., Häussler, R., Ouriachi, M.J., Ouzoulias, P., & Huet, T. (2014). ArchaEpigraph : l’«épigraphie spatiale» au service de l’étude des dynamiques des territoires. Revue archéologique de Narbonnaise, tome 47, 2014..
[^12]: 
[^14]:
[^13]:
[^15]:
[^16]: 
[^17]:
[^18]: 
[^19]:
[^20]: https://iconclass.org/
[^21]: 
[^22]: UNESCO (1945). Constitution of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation (UNESCO). Accessed: 01 February 2022, Retrieved from http://portal.unesco.org/en/ev.php-URL_ID=15244&URL_DO=DO_TOPIC&URL_SECTION=201.html
